We will now look at each
of the package managers in a bit more detail.
The first one is the RPM,
which stands for the Red Hat Package Manager.
This package manager is used
in Red Hat Enterprise Linux,
as well as other Linux distributions,
such as CentOS
and many versions of Fedora.
Several other distros make use of RPM,
but these are some of the most common ones.
The file extension for packages
managed by RPM
is .rpm.
Let's see how to work with RPM
using the Linux command line.
RPM has five basic modes of operation:
installing,
uninstalling,
upgrade,
query, and verifying.
Each of these modes can be run
using the RPM command
followed by specific command options.
To install a package,
use rpm -ivh
in the package name.
Here, -I stands for install,
-V stands for verbose
and is used to print
the detailed output of the command.
To uninstall a package,
use the rpm -e command with the package name.
To upgrade an existing package
to a newer version,
use the rpm -Uvh command, with uppercase U.
The RPM database stores information
about all RPM packages
installed in your system.
It is stored in the /war/lib/rpm directory.
It is used to query
what packages are installed,
what versions each package is,
and any changes to any files
in the package since installation,
among others.
To query this database and get details
about an installed package,
use the Rrpm -q,
followed by the package name.
Finally, use rpm -V to verify a package.
Verifying a package
compares information about files
installed from a package
with the same information
from the original package.
This is especially useful
to make sure that the package
has been installed
from a trusted and secure source.
Despite all these modes,
it's important to note
that RPM does not resolve
package dependencies on its own.
This is why we make use
of a higher-level package manager called YUM.
We will take a look at YUM next.
Let us now move on to the YUM package manager.
YUM stands for Yellowdog Updater, Modified,
and it is a free
and open-source package manager
that works on RPM-based Linux systems.
YUM works with software repositories,
which are essentially
a collection of packages,
and provides package
and dependency management
on RPM-based distros.
The repository information
is stored in the /etc/yum.repos.d,
and the repository files
have a .repo extension.
YUM acts as a high-level package manager,
but under the hood,
it still depends on RPM
to manage packages on the Linux system.
Unlike RPM,
YUM handles package dependencies very well,
it's able to install any dependent packages
to get the base package
installed on the Linux system.
Let us see how YUM installs a package.
We know that YUM depends
on software repositories,
which act as a warehouse
containing hundreds
and thousands of RPM package files.
These repositories can be local,
that is installed on your laptop for example,
or on a remote location that can be accessed
through transfer protocols,
such as FTP,
HTTP,
or HTTPS.
The information about the repository
is saved in a configuration file
under /etc/yum.repos.d/directory.
Under the hood,
YUM still makes use
of the RPM package manager
to install the package on the system.
Usually, the operating system comes bundled
with its own software repository.
For example,
for a Red Hat OS with an active subscription,
you would normally find a file
called redhat.repo in this directory.
This repository file points to the official
Red Hat managed software repository
for the specific version of the OS
that is running.
You can also add a new repo in this directory,
in case you don't want
to make use of the official repo.
"Why would we want to do that?"
asks Bob.
Dave replies,
"Well, the official repository
sometimes may not have
the latest version of the software
you want to install,
and sometimes it may not have
the software at all.
In such cases,
create a new repo file
and point it to a non-official
or a third party repo
and proceed with the installation."
Dave carries on with the session.
In this example,
we have added a new repository for Engine X.
This can be used to install
the latest Engine X package.
Now let's look
at the sequence of steps involved
while installing the package.
Once a YUM install command is issued,
YUM first runs a transaction check.
If the package is not installed in the system,
YUM checks the configured repositories
under the repos.d directory
for the availability
of the requested package.
It also checks
if any of the dependent packages
are already installed in the system,
or if it needs to be upgraded.
After this step,
a transaction summary is displayed
on the screen for the user to review.
If we wish to proceed with the install,
enter the Y button.
This step can be skipped
by providing a -Y flag
with the YUM install command.
YUM will download and install
the necessary RPMs to the Linux system.
Let's now wrap up this section
by looking at some of the common YUM commands.
The YUM repo list command will show you
all the repos added to your system.
In this example,
we can find that there are
three repositories added:
the CentOS 7 Base,
EPEL repo for extra packages,
and a CentOS 7 Extras repository.
If you want to check which package
should be installed
for a specific command to work,
use the yum provides command
with the command name as the argument.
In this example,
we are looking for the package
that provides the SCP command
using the yum provides command.
In the output of this command,
we can see that SCP is offered
by the openssh-clients package.
We already saw that we can use
the YUM Install command to install a package.
To remove it,
use the YUM Remove command.
If you want to update a single package,
use the YUM Update command
with the package name.
For example,
here we are attempting to update
a single package for Telnet.
However, it's already in the latest version
in the repository,
and as a result,
no action is taken.
To update all packages
installed in the system,
use the YUM Update command
without any other argument.
This command will check all the packages
installed in the system
and mark any that can be updated.
It will also check for new dependent packages
to be installed if it finds any.
YUM has several other command options
than what we discussed.
Use the man page or command-line help
for the complete list.